Hi, are we all in the right place?
Ah, there we go. There's Tiano, and I hear
David.
Hi, Mr. Chairman. Just checking I was in the right place.
Yes, you are in the right place.
Fabulous.
Now.
We're in public session now.
Just bear with us.
Ah, here we go. Oh,
I think they're on.
Morning, everyone.
Good morning,
Andy.
I'm Alex.
Oh, Alex. Sorry.
Yeah.
You're labeled as Andy.
Right.
We're doing a double act.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You have
five minutes
for your presentation. Take your
submissions read.
So I'll give you a little bit of time to do your
introductory comments, and then if you leave time for questions, that'd be really
useful. So it's in your hands.
Away you go.
Okay. Yeah, good morning, everyone. My name's Alex.
And my name is Andy, and we're bringing you an important message from the future.
But before we move forward in time, it's important to move back.
I'd first of all like to paint a picture for you of our youth.
We grew up in a land where the oceans were plentiful.
We caught fish on every trip, some we kept and many we put
back. These were sort of amazing days spent with family
and friends. We caught fish, lobster, crab,
often ending up on the beach in the evening beside a
beachside fire.
But that was 35 years ago, and it wasn't in New Zealand.
We grew up in Guernsey. Guernsey's a small island in the
English Channel.
Back then, it was a fishing mecca where people would come to go fishing and
leave raving about the Channel Islands and the amazing
catches they got there.
Now the strange thing is, back in our 20s, we started to notice a
decline in the fish we were catching. Fewer fish and smaller fish.
Meanwhile, out to sea, the commercial fleet were working hard.
They were gillnetting and trawling, and it seemed fairly obvious to us that there
was a decline. And talking to the old boys, they told
us tales of even more astonishing abundance.
So clearly this decline wasn't a new thing.
However, what we heard from the commercial fishing industry was calm assurance.
"Don't worry, all is well," they told us.
"We're fishing sustainably, trust us. Why do we want to overfish?
It's our livelihood.
We've run the numbers and we've engaged the scientists and the stocks are perfectly
healthy and there are plenty more fish in the sea."
So you can see the startling similarity with what we heard 30 years ago and what
we're hearing in New Zealand now. Once again, we're being told the seas are
healthy, when to all of us it seems they're not.
We've been presented with a Fisheries Amendment Bill that will prioritize exports,
profit, and private interests, a bill that will certainly accelerate
the take of ocean resources whilst diminishing the opportunity for any of us
to rally against it. Now here's the interesting thing.
What if we could jump forward 30 years and see what the effects of massive
overfishing can do to an ecosystem, a population, and an
entire economy?
Well, we can't look at New Zealand right now, but we can look at Guernsey and
the rest of Europe. How have their oceans fared in the last 30 years
since? Unfortunately, not very well at
all.
I visited the island again last year and the seas are virtually barren.
I dived the same areas that I dived in my youth and it's
completely changed. I was gutted.
Practically any fish of edible size has gone, both the high value
and the low value species.
Now is this what will happen in New Zealand? It's very hard to say.
But I think one thing we can be assured of is that this Fisheries
Amendment Bill will increase the likelihood of that happening here.
And it seems to me we've gone beyond the canary in the coal mine stage.
We've already fished out the northeast coast scallops and the crayfish, the
Hauraki mussels have gone. The Hapuka are only seen
offshore in small numbers and many species are well below
50% of their original biomass. So do you see a pattern
emerging here? Can you see the similarities with Guernsey and many other
ocean nations around the world?
But it's important also to look beyond the sea life and look to the people, those
who enjoy the ocean and the businesses that depend upon it.
Back in Guernsey, the bays which once bustled with small boats are now quiet.
Many of the tackle shops and marine stores, they went out of business.
And our friends and family who all used to go fishing and boating together no
longer bother. What's the point of going out to sea when there's no fish to catch?
And remember the social impact of this.
All those fabulous days that we spent as kids boating, fishing,
barbecuing our fresh catch and sharing it with our families.
These are no longer a thing and a whole way of life has been completely
extinguished.
And there's one more point I'd like to make, that if this bill is to be
decided on economics alone,
then know this, the Guernsey fishing industry has collapsed
despite their unfounded assurances that all would be okay.
And where do the people of Guernsey now go to buy their fish?
Well, they go to the supermarket and yes, you've guessed it, they buy hoki
from New Zealand.
We realize we're not in Guernsey or Europe.
We're on the other side of the world, but there are many, many parallels with other
ocean nations who've suffered systemic declines in marine
species. So you, the decision makers, have a chance here
today to reverse this trend. So we implore you to vote for the
people.
And vote for the ocean
And vote for a better future than the one that we have already experienced.
We believe that we need to vote, and you need to vote to kill the entire Fisheries
Amendment Bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Look, I'm
afraid we've come to the five-minute mark already.
That's all right.
But I really appreciate the effort that you've made to put a
submission in, and thank you.
Thank you.
Right. Moving on.
The next submitter is Ben Dobbie.
Come on up, Ben. Just-
Where do you want me to stand?
If you sit in the middle chair at the front here.
Oh, right.
In front of the microphone.
Yeah.
Right.
Right up here. Yep.
Got you.
Welcome-
Hello
... to the Select Committee.
Thank you for your submission. Take your submission as read.
Five minutes goes very quickly. If you'd like some questions, leave some time for
those,
and away you go.
Thank you very much. I'm a little underprepared member of the
public who, um, this is my first experience being in
Parliament, so thank you for
your
consideration.
So I just wanted to talk to a few
sections in the bill,
particularly about restricting camera access onboard
ships.
I believe that this accountability is
essential given the public nature of the oceans and the public interest in the
oceans. I think we need to
have that accountability of having camera access
onboard ships.
I also think that the five-year system,
the multi-year catch decision five-year system is too inflexible for
what we
require. We need to be able to respond to the scientific data
and what that tells us about our
ecosystems.
I recommend very much that this bill be scrapped.
I've recently seen in examples of documentaries of how
protecting even small amounts of our coastline can spill over into
other areas and can benefit
all the surrounding areas. Doing this would benefit everyone, hobby fishermen,
environmentalists like myself, and even the commercial fishing industry.
Okay.
We need to go beyond just scrapping this bill, but also
to adhere to the UN target of 30% protected oceans by
2030, which I might add the government has signed on to.
Thank you.
Very good. All right.
Could you delve a bit more into the
camera access
question and-
Yes
... what you think looks good, and what you think
what you're not happy with, with what has been proposed?
So what I'm not happy with is the proposed
blocking of public access to camera footage,
and that
the potential for fines for misuse of camera
footage. I think it needs to be public
information given that what is being fished
is relevant to the public. Everything in
our oceans is
a shared resource, and I think we have the right to know what's being taken out of
our oceans.
Do you think,
just playing devil's advocate here, that recreational fishers should have a camera
on their boats as well?
I can't speak to that too much. I
personally don't fish. I'm
vegan. I would rather that nobody took any
fish out of the ocean, but I realize that that's unrealistic.
I
think, though, that the volumes that are being fished by the commercial
fishing industry
mean that they need
that requirement of public accountability because the
volumes that they're taking are far larger than the hobby fishing industry.
Mr. Chair, can I ask-
We have a question from Rachel Boyack.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for your submission.
I'm just Zooming in here from Nelson.
Question I've got is, I guess, around you've talked about transparency, but also,
what about the privacy of those who are working on the ships?
And actually, sometimes the vessels are quite small and for some
people working in the sector, it's actually where they're living and
having their break time as well. So I'm just interested how you
balance that transparency with protection for people who are just doing their
jobs.
I think it would depend where you could put
the cameras on the ships so that they're not invading people's personal
space, but still
providing information on what is being caught.
I
personally feel that it is more important, if you
are going on to a fishing ship to
catch fish that is essentially a public resource,
then
I think it's incumbent upon you to
essentially lose a bit of
privacy in that.
Okay. I guess if you looked at other industries, though, where,
say let's look at, um,
uh-People who work in
milking sheds.
There's public interest there, but there aren't cameras that are then able to be
released to the public of people doing their jobs.
So, would you see this as something that needs to be extended
into other industries?
Yes, possibly. Yep. Yeah.
Look, thanks. We've come to time, so it goes very quickly.
Thank you very much for your time, Ian.
Awesome.
And have a great day.
Thank you very much.
Right.
Moving on.
We now have Gilbert Peterson.
Welcome, Gilbert.
Kia ora.
The time goes fast, as you noticed.
Yep.
So,
I suggest you keep your introductory remarks short if
you would like questions. So it's-
Sure
... in your hands.
So I want to talk about the context, the broader issues, really
using a couple of examples
to sort of amplify what I said in my submission.
For many years, I worked at the Employers and Manufacturers Association in
Auckland, and more recently I edited and published Dive
Pacific Magazine.
During my time at EMA,
one thing I learned was that innovation is the mother and
father of productivity on which our economic growth
depends, and I fail to see much innovation in
this bill. And in fact, to me, it looks very
19th century.
Several Nobel laureates have explored and demonstrated the
economics of how innovation and productivity
work.
During my time at Dive Pacific Magazine, I learned a lot, too.
I wanted to share two examples because
they're about whales and bottom trawling.
They're the context for what we're talking about.
In Dive Pacific, we published articles by such as
Jean-Michel Cousteau,
and one of these on the trophic cascades of whales,
I think illustrates just how 19th century the thinking
behind this bill is.
Back then, in the 19th century, we all know we hunted and killed lots of
whales, so much so their numbers have yet to recover from
150 years ago. And in fact, back then,
by killing whales, we were actually harming ourselves
and our ability to sustain ourselves through the food that the
whales are actually releasing back into the food
chain. The baleen whales, the really big ones,
in
particular,
they go down deep and eat krill,
phytoplankton, and they bring it up and they come to the
surface and they distribute vast amounts of fecal matter.
And that fecal matter fertilizes the phytoplankton at
the surface. The phytoplankton can't live without light.
And that
phytoplankton provides food for
the krill, and so the cycle goes on.
And
all the understanding of this trophic cascade,
it hasn't really been understood or explored at all much
until the last few decades.
So, by killing the whales, we were actually harming our own ability to
survive,
and I think there's a lesson in that. Who would've thought?
I would hope that a more thoughtful
amendment to the Fisheries
Act in future will take into account marine science such as
this, rather than apparently disregard it.
But we're only beginning to understand some of this stuff.
The second example is bottom trawling.
In 2021, Nature magazine,
which is a highly reputable magazine, published an article that reported bottom
trawling scrapes 1.9 million square miles
of seabed each year. New Zealand makes its contribution to this,
of course,
and it releases
vast amounts of carbon that would otherwise
stay in the seabed indefinitely.
In that report, Nature calculated the amount of carbon
so released exceeds that of Germany,
or about the same amount as international
world travel
globally. Who would've thought that?
So, whales and bottom trawling are just examples.
Undersized fish. Anyway,
here today we're going to discuss the merits of catching and selling undersized
fish. How did that happen? I find that incredibly embarrassing.
And where are the incentives listed anywhere for there to be
development of fishing capture methods which
allow small fish to escape and become bigger fish worth
catching and eating?
Cameras on fishing boats.
I don't doubt that responsible fisher people are okay with those cameras
and with the images from them,
for them to become available to the public.
The cameras protect the fisher people as much as they do the fish.
And the taxpayer currently is funding most of those cameras.
So this bill is telling us we, the taxpayer,
we're being required to pay for these cameras and these images, but
we're not allowed to see them. So we're being
told we can pay, but we can't actually use or see.
It's like taxation without representation.
It's the very antithesis of what our democracy is based on
I find
in the bill there are many other flaws, and
I would urge the select committee to recommend that it go no
further.
Thanks, Gilbert. Our time has come to an end.
Yeah.
I appreciate you making the effort to come and submit.
Very well. Thank you.
Thank you. Right. Next, we have Mae Dobbie.
Morning, Mae. How are you?
Good.
Welcome to the select committee.
Congratulations on taking part in the
democratic process.
You've got five minutes, and as you've seen, it takes
just a blink of the eye for the five minutes to go past, so
away you go.
Hi. My name is Mae. I'm nine, and I'm from Whakatane.
I think it would be dumb if this bill comes in.
Our oceans are already in a terrible state.
We should be protecting them, not making it even easier for fishing boats to
ruin them. We're on track to a dead ocean.
Do we want to make it worse? What I don't like about this
bill is that the Minister of Fisheries can make decisions about how much the
fishing boats are allowed to catch, and the environment is not really the main
thing that is considered when making those decisions.
Penalties for bad practice have also been lowered.
I also don't like that when there are cameras on the boat, the footage won't
really be able to be used, and those who share it can be fined
heaps. We need camera footage to be accessible,
because if the fishing companies know the footage won't be available, they'll
ignore it and do what they like.
A while ago, the Ministry for Primary Industries went through some
footage, and found that there had been much more dolphins, whales, and other
animals killed by fishing boats than fishing
companies said.
We know these commercial fishing boats lie.
Why would we make it even easier for them to do so?
Also, if there are plenty of cameras on the boats with easily accessed footage,
it will make it safer for people on the fishing boats who get abused.
This is a very big problem on fishing boats.
And New Zealand is the only country in the world that allows bottom trawling in the
South Pacific. Bottom trawling is like bulldozing the ocean floor.
It destroys everything in its path, including coral.
Coral takes a really, really long time to grow and will take a long
time to grow back, all for the sake of money.
Allowing fishing companies more control over how they fish will likely lead to
more bottom trawling. In New Zealand, we claim to be clean and green.
This is a lie. Is the government trying to destroy the ocean?
We need to be prioritizing the environment and the world generations
after you're living, not prioritizing a few rich guys' pockets.
We need to object this bill entirely. We also need to ban bottom trawling.
Shouldn't we be ashamed to be the last country bottom trawling in the South
Pacific?
As a vegan, I don't think we should have any commercial fishing in any part of our
oceans. But I know that won't happen, so I suggest that we do what the UN and
heaps of charities and scientists say we should do, and protect at least
30% of it. In NZ, we protect about 1% at the moment.
We need to defend our ocean, and if we work together and do our bit, we can
save the ocean. Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much. Now, does any of the committee members have any questions?
Teanaru.
Kia ora, Mae. Thank you very much for a very
good submission. It was very clear, and we
heard your concerns. I was wondering,
if you were to look forward into the future, say, 10 years into the future,
what would you like to see in terms of the health of
our ocean?
Well, I would like to see
an ocean with lots of healthy coral and fish,
and a good ecosystem.
So, yeah.
Rachel.
Hi, Mae. I just wanted to say thank you very much for your
awesome submission.
And I've got a question for you.
Have you had the opportunity to go snorkeling and go looking at places where there
are lots of fish in the ocean, so you can enjoy that, or is that something you
still got to get an opportunity to do?
That's something that I've still got an opportunity to do, but I have once gone and
sort of saw them and seaweed underneath the water.
But yeah.
That sounds really cool. I hope you get that opportunity one day to go
snorkeling and to look at some of the fish in marine reserves and stuff, because
it's really awesome.
I can imagine.
We should try and make that happen. All right.
Yeah.
Are you offering, Rachel?
Oh, I think we should talk to the
local MPs for you, and we can have a chat, because this year I got to go and
see some snapper at the Leigh Marine Reserve, and it was awesome.
So-
Nice
... I think that's something they should help you do. I'll have a chat to them.
Very good. All right. There doesn't seem to be any more questions, so thank you
very much for your submission, Mae.
Thank you for listening.
Very good.
Right. Moving on.
We now have Rebecca Bruno.
Mōrena.
Good morning, Rebecca. Welcome to the Primary Production select committee.
Thank you.
You've seen how it works.
Seen how it works. Tough act to follow.
So, I'll leave it with you.
All right.
Tena koutou. Mōrena. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Recently, I watched my lovely five-year-old daughter catch her first
fish. It was a small one, although you wouldn't know it from the retelling of our
stories. Each time the story is told, it grows a little bigger.
The story's a little more magical.Now that moment mattered and I want that
same moment, that same connection to our oceans to be there for my
grandchildren and for theirs. We are not users and takers of these resources.
We are kaitiaki. We need to protect them.
I want to acknowledge the importance of this bill, and New Zealand's export
economy does rely heavily on our fishing industry, and I'm actually fully
supportive of a thriving, successful sector, but the success
must be sustainable. I am concerned that the bill reduces transparency
and oversight and shifts the focus towards short-term gains from
commercial fishing. I support a strong and thriving industry,
but not at the cost of future fish stocks and not at the cost of my children's
opportunity to fish.
Sustainability is not an opposition to economic success, it's what
enables it. If we take too much, too fast or without the right
safeguards, we don't just risk the environment, we risk the long-term viability of
the industry itself, and we risk something that's harder to measure, the
connection between our people and the ocean and between people and the environment.
New Zealand has an opportunity here.
Why can't we lead with an approach that is innovative, future-focused and
genuinely sustainable? An approach that supports the fishing industry
to adapt, evolve and lead rather than prioritize short-term financial
gains. Sustainability should not be seen as a constraint.
It should be seen as a driver of innovation.
So all I wish to leave you with is this: we can fish for today or we can
fish for tomorrow. We can take what we can or we can take what we
should. If we get this right, we don't have to choose between the economy and the
environment. We can protect both.
I urge the committee to ensure that this bill, if it continues,
supports a fishing industry that is not just successful but is sustainable
for our generations to come.
Thank you, Rebecca. Does the committee have any questions?
I see Rachel seems to have dropped off.
No, I'm here. I've just got my camera off briefly. I am here.
Oh, okay. Sorry.
Teanau, did you have a question?
No, that was a very clear submission which I agree with.
Okay.
Well, I do. Just what
particular part of the bill do you think
is the most egregious in your opinion?
I think that's a very good question.
I think the changing around catch
limits. I think it's obvious to let fish grow.
And I know that there's been a lot of focus on the camera
pieces, and we could argue that, and I do think that that's actually
perhaps the noise around that cloud some of the other details.
So I would say for me it's sizes and catch limits.
We need to make sure that we're following the science.
Right.
And whatever method
is, whether it's cameras or something else, we need to make sure that we follow
those. So.
So you
may have seen last week we had the
minister in front of the committee.
Mm-hmm.
And his
stated intention was that the
size currently,
he contends that a number of undersized fish will
perish even if they're released back into the ocean.
So the intention is to include that as part of their
catch against their quota.
Mm.
So they're not releasing the undersized fish-
Mm-hmm
... that die anyway.
Sure.
And then
top up with
legal fish.
Yes.
I guess
what question is, would that be acceptable, do you think?
I think the question is why are we catching the small fish in the first place?
Why can't we have a method where we only take--
Why are we bulk catching fish? I think that's been
raised here around we're the only nation still trawling in the South Pacific.
So if we are catching smaller fish that are gonna die regardless of what
we do, why are we doing practices that are allowing that anyway?
So I think it's a bigger upstream problem.
I think what you say is sensible. If we are going to trawl
and we are gonna take everything, then everything you take is against your catch.
But I think we should look at the wider problem is why are we taking those fish in
the first place.
Very good. Thank you very much, Rebecca. I appreciate you taking the time.
Moving on now. Our next submitters are
all by Zoom.
So we've got Kiri Moran.
Good morning, Kiri.
Oops. That might be helpful, mightn't it, if I have my camera on.
Ah.
Sorry. Apologies. I thought I did already.
Yeah.
Anyway, I'll start from scratch.
Yes, please.
Tena koutou katoa. Thank you for the opportunity to speak
today. I should clarify from the outset that my interest in this
bill is driven solely by its environmental and public
accountability implications. I'm shocked by the legislation
with such serious implications for our marine ecosystems
is even being considered.
It is no surprise then that I do not support the Fisheries
Amendment Bill. Further, I express my strong support for
the positions put forward by Legacy and Forest and Bird, whose
submissions highlight fundamental flaws in the Fisheries Amendment
Bill, which I won't be able to cover everything
todayI want to make four key points today.
First, this bill weakens environmental protections at a time when
we need stronger safeguards. New Zealand's marine
ecosystems are already under enormous pressure from climate
change, habitat loss, and decades of
overfishing. Instead of strengthening regulatory
framework, this bill loosens it. It creates pathways
for increased catch, reduced scrutiny, and more
discretionary decision-making, all at the expense of
ecological resilience.
From an environmental perspective,
this is moving in the wrong direction.
Second, it reduces transparency.
One of the most concerning aspects is the shift away from
independent verification and towards more closed-door
processes. Restricting access to onboard camera
reporting requirements undermine the transparency that New Zealanders
have repeatedly said they want in fisheries management.
If the system is functioning well, transparency should
be welcomed, not avoided.
Three, it concentrates power and reduces
democratic oversight. The bill grants the minister
greater authority while reducing the checks and
balances that ensure decisions are grounded in environmental
science and public interest.
This is not a minor procedural adjustment.
It's a structural change that risks sidelining the voices of
communities, scientists, and environmental
advocates.
New Zealanders have consistently shown that they want
sustainable fisheries and strong environmental
protections. This bill moves us further
away from this expectation.
Four, it privileges short-term commercial interests
over long-term public good and environmental
sustainability. Our oceans are a shared resource.
When legislation prioritizes the interests
of a small number of quota holders over the health of marine
ecosystems and the rights of future
generations, such as the gorgeous Mae,
something is fundamentally out of balance.
A sustainable fishery is one where the environment comes
first, because without a healthy ecosystem, there is no fishery
at all.
In closing, I want to leave you with this thought.
Aotearoa's marine environment is one of our greatest taonga.
You have the chance today to protect something that cannot speak for
itself,
but that future generations will depend on.
I hope you choose the path that honors that responsibility.
Nga mihi nui.
Thank you. Does the committee have any questions?
Teanau.
Thank you very much for your very comprehensive
submission. I was interested to know a bit more about your
perspectives on your point number two around
transparency
and verification of quotas and stuff.
In your mind, what does that
tell New Zealand when that power is strengthened?
In my mind, it
weakens the democratic process for a start.
To me, it shows that something
underhanded is going on, that not everything is,
obviously, as I said in my statement, that not everything is
completely transparent. So things like
bycatch, for instance, all these
beautiful marine mammals.
And it's not being reported, so
potentially that could mean that we don't know the reason why
the numbers of these beautiful marine mammals are
declining. If we can actually see that actually the--
Sorry, I'm a little bit nervous. It's the first time I've done this,
so.
Kerri, I just have to interrupt you there. We've exceeded time.
Can I just ask a quick sup though, just on that?
Yeah.
No.
Thank you.
We've run out of time. I'm sorry, Rachel. We'll just have to move on.
Okay. No, I just wanted to clarify, the MPI do actually release the data on what's
caught. They actually release that in
paper form.
Great.
So, thank you for your submission.
Thank you.
And
you shouldn't need to be nervous.
Teanau doesn't bite.
You're all right.
Thank you.
No worries.
Moving on. We now have Cam McLeod
on Zoom as well.
Teanau, your
sound quality's really bad.
Yeah.
It is very hard to hear you, and I would think
that when you're asking a question,
those that have been asked will find it difficult to hear you as
well.
Maybe I'll try again.
Yeah, sorry. It's apart of my laptop.
Oh, look. Technical stuff, mate.
So is Cam online?
Just trying to prompt him to accept
the
motion.
Are they came.
A few technical issues here, team.
Good morning, all.
Good morning
I've just been rejoined as a panelist.
Yes.
Good morning and welcome to the Select Committee.
Thank you.
You have five minutes, and the time is yours
to use how you wish. But if you want questions, I suggest
leave a good amount of time at the end. Away you go.
Thank you, Miles.
Yeah. So as my submission says, I'll open by
simply saying, I do not support the Fisheries Amendment Bill
2026 because it quietly shifts control
of a public resource away from the public.
The submitters, or the majority of the submitters I would say, representing
tens of thousands of New Zealanders, reject the bill entirely.
Not because the fisheries don't need improvement, but because this
bill doesn't fix the real problem.
The current law is already strong.
The failure has been in how it's applied.
And instead of improving implementation, this bill
rewrites the rules, so past failures become
acceptable. Now here's the important part.
You can't understand this bill by looking at one clause at a time.
And in fact, Miles, you
spoke to some earlier
submitters and asked them, "What aspect of the bill do you not like?"
It's the whole thing, because the changes seem technical, but they form a
pattern. Environmental protections are narrowed, public
input is reduced, accountability is weakened, and
legal challenge becomes harder. Taken together, this is
what's known as regulatory capture, where the industry being
regulated gains influence over the rules themselves.
Okay? Take a look at what gets overlooked.
The bill limits how environmental factors are considered when setting catch
limits. It focuses on large management areas, which can
hide local depletion. So while numbers may look stable on paper,
entire local ecosystems can be quietly degrading.
Even more concerning, the less we know about a fish stock, the
weaker the legal protection becomes.
That reverses a basic principle of good management.
Uncertainty should lead to caution, not leniency.
The bill also shifts how decisions are made.
It allows reliance on industry catch data as a primary signal.
It introduces preset rules run by officials instead of
ministers, and it leans on voluntary industry measures
instead of enforceable regulation.
On the surface, that sounds efficient, but when you look closer, it
moves decision-making away from independent oversight towards
systems influenced by the very groups that benefit from higher
catch limits.
Then there are the incentives, the quiet drivers of behavior.
The bill allows more discarding of fish at sea.
It enables unused quota to be carried forward in large amounts,
and it reduces certain penalties.
None of these sound dramatic on their own, but together they encourage
overfishing, waste, and delayed response to declining
stocks.
At the same time, transparency is reduced.
Camera footage from fishing vessels can be withheld.
Public consultation is limited, and the timeframe to legally challenge
decisions is cut to just 20 days. So even if something
goes wrong, it becomes much harder to see it, question
it, and stop it.
So step back and a deeper pattern emerges.
When you look at the whole picture, decisions are made earlier,
public input comes later or not at all,
and legal challenge is constrained.
This locks in commercial interests first and limits the abilities
of others to respond.
So
this isn't just a technical fisheries bill.
It's a shift in who holds power over a shared natural
resource. The real question isn't whether this improves
efficiency. The real question is: who
are our fisheries being managed for?
Because when you look closely, the biggest change here isn't in the
wording of the law,
it's in who the system ultimately serves.
It moves decision-making away from independent oversight
towards systems influenced by the very groups that benefit from higher
catch limits.
This bill should be rejected outright.
Good government is about regulating excessive imbalance of power in
society. I think it is entirely legitimate that owners of
fishing quota are regulated to ensure the methods they use only catch
the fish they are entitled to in the amounts they are entitled
to without killing many other species and damaging the marine
habitats.
Does owning fish quota allow you to wreck the place and
kill indiscriminately? This bill is designed to allow
and encourage commercial interests to do just that.
And to come to Rachel's question earlier on about the milking shed.
If the taxpayer or the cows in the milking shed were
just
out there to help yourself to, feel free.
Yeah, then maybe you should have cameras in milking sheds.
But the cows are there because the farmer put the cows there.
So if the fishing industry put the fish in the water, then maybe they'd have the
right to talk about cameras.
That's the end of my submission. Thank you, all.
Thank you. We've come to time.
Oh.
So,
it goes quick.
It does.
But thanks for making the effort today.
And we'll move on.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Right. Next submission is from Andrew Church.
Oh,
Anthony Phipps.
So Andrew's not
submitting.
Yeah.
I think that's his next submission.
Oh, yeah.
Anthony Phipps
is the next submitter. There we are, Tony.
Thanks for taking the time today.
No.
You have five minutes.
Fire away.
Right.
Kia ora koutou, and thank you for this opportunity to
make a submission. And I'm glad we live in a
country where people can do this and participate in the
process.
I do not support the bill. In fact, I
strongly oppose it because I think at a high level it's going
in the wrong direction,
and that we really should be looking at
strengthening, not weakening and undermining
environmental protections and protection of the
fisheries for
all New Zealanders and generations of New Zealanders to come.
So I think at a high level, the
purpose of the bill
should be going in the other direction.
And as you've heard from many submitters,
the values that New Zealanders hold around
fisheries
are much, much wider and different
to just
the commercial values.
I oppose this bill because I think we should go in the
other direction with transparency, and in fact,
instead of reducing transparency, we should be improving
monitoring and reporting and public access to
information and improving enforcement.
For example, I think one of the strengths of the New Zealand democratic
system and one of the major important tools is the Official
Information Act. So to weaken access to
information through the Official Information Act and
make more exemptions is the wrong direction to go,
particularly in relation to resources that
are
so widely valued.
Even under the current system, when
I've tried to seen things that I think are
wrong and against the law in terms of commercial fishing
and reported it, it just seems very hard to get
anything followed up.
And
requesting information seems to be routinely
declined, citing commercial
sensitivity or something, rather than
being able to get the information.
So the system's already not that transparent, and this just
to me is going in the wrong direction.
I also think it's going in the wrong direction in
terms of
ability to overcatch
quota management species and discard them.
I think, again, the law should really be going in
the opposite direction and making it harder, not
easier
to overcatch and discard.
So
really, in summary,
as I started, I think
this is going in the wrong direction, and that
our legislation should really
better balance and protect the
sustainability
values of fisheries, and
that I truly hope that my
grandchildren continue to catch fish and that their
children and future generations likewise.
So thank you.
Thank you, Tony. Any questions from the panel?
No, there don't seem to be any. Look, thanks for your time today, Tony.
Appreciate you
making the effort to not only do a written submission, but also
submit to the committee.
So-
Thank you
... thanks very much.
Right. Moving on, we now have Trent Adams.
Ah, good morning, Trent. Welcome to the-
Morning
... select committee.
You have five minutes.
How you use that time's up to you. Away you go.
So as you said, my name's Trent Adams.
I currently live in Raglan, have done for the last 20 years.
Grew up in Coromandel, umFishing has been a huge
part of my life and many people around me, family and the likes.
I feel my main reason for the oppose of this bill is that the fisheries
are already being mismanaged hugely,
and this bill is only going to increase the demand on the fisheries that we
have left.
Personally, watching
the demise of crayfish, scallops,
snappers,
pretty much all
species that a recreational fisherman would go for,
almost become unattainable in many areas
is beyond heartbreaking to me. And even
the
reason that we're here would seem to make it easier for the
boats and the operations that already
exist to somehow continue,
and pretty much just keep going until there is nothing left.
So I've got a few points.
We've already had the issue of illegal and unregulated fishing, and I've
witnessed and reported this umpteen times in Coromandel and
Raglan. Whether it be trawlers in too close to shore,
dumping of fish in the thousands,
and being part of picking up
hundreds of dead corpses of snapper and gurnard off our coast
as a child and then into my adult years.
I regularly dive and fish and have been doing so since I was three years old,
and have witnessed firsthand the demise of all these fisheries.
And there's nothing
like this to sort of spark my interest in helping
try and stop this sort of thing from happening.
Reducing transparency is not going to end well,
especially when our fisheries are already under pressure.
Just look at the crayfish ban and scallop ban on the East
Coast.
Can anyone tell me how a managed fishery now has a total ban on
recreational crayfish and scallops?
And as far as I'm aware, commercial fishing is still allowed to
take these species.
The ocean
is one of New Zealand's greatest assets.
Sorry, I get a bit emotional about this.
Once it's depleted, we
can't easily rebuild
it. Recovering could take decades or may never fully happen.
I'd rather see stronger enforcement, stronger monitoring, and better protection
of our marine ecosystem. Practices like bottom trawling
are causing real damage to the seabed and wider ecosystems.
Once that damage is done, it is very hard to
reverse.
What worries me with this bill seems to be more direction making
further towards large commercial interests and further away from
everyday New Zealanders.
New Zealand should not feel pressured to maximize exports at the
expense of long-term health of its own marine
environment. A lot of Kiwis were raised with the
idea that the ocean is something you protect, not exploit.
That's why it's frustrating watching industrial scale practices
damage fisheries, seabeds, while ordinary people are expected to simply
trust the system is working.
One of my biggest concerns is the removal of the public access to
onboard camera footage through new section
227H. Transparency is critical
if the public is expected to trust the system.
Many ordinary New Zealanders feel the bill shifts fisheries management
away from protecting a shared natural resource and towards
maximizing commercial extraction efficiencies.
What else we got?
Yeah, and personally, I'd just like to
put out a question for everyone as to, are we just
hell-bent on filling the pockets and keeping
commercial fishing
businesses alive to the point where there will be nothing
left?
And why does the
world and many inland New Zealanders feel that they have
some right to eat fish when and whenever they like,
when fishing is a very simple task that it
requires minimal money, minimal effort, and a lot of pleasure
to go and provide for your family.
And why are we just hell-bent on making it super
easy for everyone and anyone to eat it?
And personally,
I don't very regularly see anyone purchasing fish at a
supermarket or anywhere the likes.
Most of the time it'll be the odd restaurant or fish and chips.
Yeah.
Thanks.
That's pretty much all I have here.
We're over time. I appreciate you taking the effort
to put in a submission, and thank you very much for that.
Cool.
I wanted to ask my question.
Right. We're running out of time. We're running behind time as it is. Right.
Moving on.
Can I say-
It'd be nice to have one question please, mate.
Look, I'm sorry. You were half-
Yeah, well, try tell that to the snapper, bro.
Yeah, well, we're moving on.
Moving on to Paul Tudor.
Just checking my microphone. Kia ora.
Firstly, I'd like to thank the committee for letting me speak to them in
person. I'd also like to acknowledge the people who've just come before me.
I think we had a phenomenal-- I've just been watching over the last hour.
These have been some phenomenal submissions, and all due respect to the
people who have come before me. UmIn my
submission, I've said that I would like to reject this bill in its entirety.
I actually want to go further than that.
I think the current Fisheries Act needs to be repealed and replaced with a
different form of legislation altogether.
It is clear to us that the quota management system is not producing abundance.
We used to read quite regularly, world-class quota management system.
I haven't read that recently in the last three or four years, because I think
it's becoming clear to everyone that a species by species approach
is not working in terms of either the environment, but also in
terms of the industries, the two industries.
We talk about the,
quotation marks, "commercial fishing industry" and, quotation marks, "the
recreational fishing industry." They're actually both
commercial. And recreational fishers are actually
worth more GDP-wise to the economy and in terms of jobs as well for
Kiwis.
I note somewhat ironically that yesterday Minister Jones was interviewed
by the New Zealand Herald about-- and he said he wanted to see more jobs for New
Zealanders, and so do I. I think we all do.
And the system that I think we should be going towards,
if we rewrite our fisheries, is to maybe look at the inshore
fishery separately from the large ocean-going
commercial fishing ships, which I note somewhat ironically are
often not New Zealand ships. They're actually brought into our waters.
But we should probably look at managing that inshore a little bit differently, and
I think for all, including small fishing
companies and small local fishermen that can sell their wares
to the local restaurant. I'm all for that.
But this bill is just going to reinforce all the mistakes that
we've made with the QMS. We just need to reject this bill and, as I
say, go back to the original act itself and start again.
Now, in my submission, I talked about my personal connection going back
140, 150 years back to whaling.
My great, great, great grandfather was a whaler.
We don't do whaling anymore,
so we clearly learn from our mistakes, right?
So my personal connection, I'm a fisherman, obviously.
I'm a saltwater fly fisherman, which is a little bit unusual.
Mm.
I go out on the Hauraki Gulf and Coromandel,
and I release little fish. One of the submitters a
couple of submitters ago was talking about fishing techniques that were
better for the environment.
So we safely release kingfish, snapper, kahawai that are too
small, and they can go and grow up to become big fish.
I spend thousands of dollars on this exercise.
Ironically, one of my favorite fishing spots is only a few hundred meters from the
Prime Minister's beach, actually.
We "recreational," quotation mark,
"people" are worth a lot to the economy.
This bill is going to make it less
inviting for us to go out,
and I think it is gonna have economic impacts on that
industry. Thank you.
Thanks very much, Paul. Does the committee have any questions?
Teanau.
Kia ora. Hopefully my microphone's sorted.
Thanks for your submission,
Paul. You did talk about managing the--
in your ideal world that inshore fishing will be
managed differently. Is there something, your top one or
two or three things you think the committee should be aware of?
Well, things like the local voice.
The current catch zones are too big.
So if you look at the north of the North Island, it's a massive area.
And so local iwi can participate, but also local communities as well.
I think about places like Leigh, that little community where
there's
fishing charters, you've got the reserve, the Goat Island Reserve.
If you can imagine, they all get together, and they decide this is how
this plan's gonna act for the next three years, two years, or whatever.
They do it on a seasonal basis. But having that local voice, I think
will bring
vibrancy back to those communities.
It will also, I think these people, the person just before me,
I know he started crying, but people like him, we need to hear from him.
He's out on the water all the time. He's seeing stuff that the
sciences
officers, they only go there every six months or whatever, but he's out there
every week. So I think that would be really good.
Some sort of management plan which involves localism would be really
great.
Right. Thanks very much, Paul. We've just come to time.
Thank you,
Chair.
Yep, thanks very much for your submission.
We'll move on now to Russell Smart.
He's not online.
There's no Russell Smart here.
Shall I see outside?
Just have a look outside.
Outside.
Oh, he's not outside. All right, so he's not online, he's not
here. So what about Matt Watson?
He's here.
Oh, there he is.
Message here.
A member of the public would like to film.
Can you just let the committee know that they're happy for him to film?
You went up again.
So that guy standing over here, he'd just like to film on the phone.
Which is fine with the committee, agreement.
Yes. Well, just before we go any further, there's a member of
the public here who wants to film inside the committee room.
It's-
He's with Matt.
Is-
Are they with a submitter or is it...?
Well, he's with a submitter.
I don't have a problem with it.
Will he just be filming that submission?
Are you just filming that submission?
Yes.
Yeah, that's fine.
For that, I think that's fine.
All right. Yes.
I'm fine.
So with the leave of the committee, that's
done.
All right, Matt, welcome to-
Here.
Yes, right there in front of the microphone
Um, thank you.
Thanks for your time. And you have five minutes, which
will go very quickly, as you've noticed.
So,
if you want some questions, leave some time later.
Oh, yeah, five minutes isn't a lot of time.
No.
So I will rip into it.
Into it.
So, kia ora koutou katoa.
I am Matt Watson. I'm a rec fisher,
and a former commercial fisher.
And I've had a connection with the ocean my whole life.
And I oppose the bill, and I think all of you on the
committee will understand the overwhelming public opposition to this bill.
But it's also important to understand the reasons why the public
don't like it. And that is because for a long time, we've seen decline in our fish
stocks. We just see it when we're out on the water, when we're going to the sea.
And we've got once abundant species like crayfish,
scallops, blue cod in some areas, which are now closed.
They've collapsed. They've declined to the point.
And at the same time that we're reaching the point of collapse, we are literally
seeing fish dumping happening. We're seeing destructive
fishing methods destroying our environment.
And then along comes a bill, and it addresses none of the issues.
It doesn't take on and fix any of the big problems we've got.
Instead, it legitimizes them, and in some cases,
it even incentivizes some of the worst and most
unsustainable fishing practices that we have in New Zealand.
So, like I say, in five minutes, I can't break down this bill for you
and talk to everything that I know about through my extensive career.
But I'm just going to run through some of the things that will accelerate our
trajectory of decline, and it will collapse more
fish stocks if it goes through.
Lowering the penalty for overfishing quotas.
Allowing commercial fishers to roll over their annual catch entitlement.
It's annual for a reason, because if it stockpiles up and it's taken in
one year,
spawning biomasses can be devastated. It's wrong.
Quotas are going to be locked in for five years.
A lot can change in five years, and we need to be able to react to conserve the
fishery. The removal of environmental considerations.
That speaks for itself. We've got longer soak times for nets, and the nets
are allowed to be longer. We have the removal
of the transparency around accessing camera footage.
Now, the camera footage has already showed, the sample's looked at, that
discards are up to nine times higher than what's being reported.
So we've got no way of knowing how many fish are being taken, and the quota
system doesn't work unless we know what's being taken.
And then we have the removal of size limits for commercial
fishers in this bill.
And then we go on to amendments that
help lock in all of these changes. Removing consultation, blocking
judicial review,
and then threatening fines of up to $50,000 for anyone
that exposes onboard camera footage.
And
it's clear all of these things are things that have been asked for by the seafood
industry. And I believe that the net cause,
the reason that they're asking for it is because fishing in a
depleted—it's harder to make a profit in a depleted fishery.
So rather than this bill addressing the depletion, it just looks
to create rules that will remove some of the last remaining
safeguards just to make it easier to keep that profit going, which will only
last for the short term. And I'm not anti-commercial.
I've got a lot of friends, I used to be a commercial-- I've got family that are
commercial fishers, and a lot of them are getting in touch with me and saying, "Go,
Matty." But they're too scared to come forward because of the control that
the seafood industry has. And this bill serves to give them more
control, and it doesn't serve the people.
And we shouldn't forget it's the people that own the fish.
You people in this room, everybody out there, we own the
fish, and we deserve the right for it to be managed properly.
Because if it's managed properly,
there's plenty to go around. We can have a thriving commercial fishing industry.
We can have a booming recreational fishing industry.
The rec fishing industry contributes $1.7 billion
annually, economic activity, and we take less than
5% of the fish. Now we hear about the lauded $4
billion from the seafood industry to take
95% of the fish. Now, the economics in that speaks for
themselves, but what doesn't get spoken about
is the value of having an abundant fishery for Kiwis to be able to go
to the ocean,
catch a feed, and feed their families. Excuse me.
30 seconds left, Matt.
Yep.
So that's why this bill needs to be thrown out,
because it doesn't serve the people of New Zealand.
We can start again, get all the stakeholders around the table,
because we can't have an enduring bill with
only one stakeholder input. We need iwi around the table.
We need commercial fishers. We need rec fishers.
We need all New Zealanders to create something that we buy into that can really
look after our future generations.
One quick question.
Yep.
Rachel.
Thank you. Just a really great submission, Matt.
I agree with a lot of what you said, and really well articulated.
My obsession is around data, and my biggest concern with the bill is that
ability to transfer catch from one year to the next and the five-year limits.
Do you think our data is good enough, and what do you think we need to do to get
better data so we can do better decisions around each fish stock?
Well,
more research, more independent research.
At the moment, we use a system called CPUE, catch per unit of effort.
And that relies on the honesty of the people
that are catching the fish to say how much they've thrown overboard.
And if we don't--
For such an important thing, we should be monitoring that.
But
with no access to the footage, we really don't know.
So you can't manage any fishery when we don't know what the discards are.
Thank you.
Thank you, Matt. Unfortunately, we've come to time.
I really appreciate the effort you've made coming here.
Yeah, and if I could, I'd extend an invite to anyone on the select
committee to get in touch with me. I've got so much more I can share.
My doors are always open to discuss this.
Thanks, Matt.
Yeah.
No. Sorry.
Thank you.
No worries.
Thank you very much for your time.
Now we've got a
visit.
We're up to Ben Lord now then. Okay.
So next on our list is Benjamin Lord or Ben Lord
via Zoom.
Technical
issues team.
Here we go.
I think we have Brooke online now.
Are you there, Brooke?
Yep, I'm there. Can you hear me?
Brilliant. Yes, we can. Thank you very much for taking the time this morning.
You've got five minutes.
Fire away.
Okay. As I just said, my name's Brooke McRae.
I am a commercial diver.
I've partaken in commercial fisheries from on the
seabed as a paua diver in the Chatham
Islands, and I've done commercial diving, as my
working career, all around New Zealand and seen the sea.
I work on the seabed,
day to day, not on the surface where you can't see what's happening.
Before being a commercial diver, I've been a
spearfisherman, so my whole life I've witnessed the sea
floor. And I've witnessed a massive
decline in the health of the underwater environment.
It's just very obvious. It's in your
face every time you're there. And it's very clear to me
that
whatever we do have as a fishery system, it's just
not working.
It's been overfished, and we've demolished the
seabed to something which, in a lot of areas, you can't
recognize
areas from where I used to spearfish to what they are now.
I've personally witnessed these
scallop dredges and bottom-- I've been in the water
on scuba and seen these dredges come by and seen
the mob of snapper that come behind them, and it just looks like a rotary
hose gone across the seabed.
So
that human interaction with the seabed has
happened for my whole life
cycle, and I've witnessed that. And I've talked to other commercial divers in my
industry who are a generation ahead of me, who say they
have witnessed for their whole life the same thing, and they have
talked to the generation above them.
So
I'm just a small piece in the timeline
from what I've witnessed in the decline.
And when I was younger,
it was so much more abundant. And so this
hasn't been working for a long time,
what we've been doing to the sea.
Having no cameras on boats really does
feel like it's like the wolf check-- Sorry, the fox
checking that the chicken coop is secure.
Yeah.
The priority of
the fisheries should be, first and foremost, it should be
for environmental recovery first-
Two minutes
... the local people second,
and it should be for commercial
interests last. And I feel that this bill would put that
the opposite way around. I obviously strongly
oppose this bill, but like one of the gentlemen before me, I think the whole
system needs to be rewritten. It just doesn't work.
Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, thanks
Brooke. Is there any questions?
Yeah.
I have one. What particular aspect
of the current system
is not working?
If you were to just identify one, what would be the one thing you'd
change?
The
bulk of fish in the ocean,
the weight of protein in the ocean
is
drastically less.
That's the change. The whole thing is just not working.
If you're asked to point out, like Matt Watson said, he couldn't go
through and point out each thing. The whole how we're managing
itAnd I haven't got the
answer apart from this bill is disgusting.
But
the whole system needs to change. We need
to do something different to get different outcomes.
We've got less fish in the ocean. And then
transparency is a big one. Bottom trawling and the
interaction with the seabed should be absolutely banned.
When you witness it firsthand and you see...
I've swum across the seabed for,
until your cylinder runs out,
and it's just like a rotary hose being by.
And you swim across it for ages, and
it's just destroyed in one pass. But that's been
happening
hundreds if not thousands of times, one after the other.
So,
it's
all of these things that are wrong and they should've been
banned such a long time ago when you see the damage.
Okay. Thank you, Brook. We've come to time, but I appreciate the effort you've
made.
We'll move on now to our next submitter, which is Bruce Boyd.
Morning, Bruce.
Yes, good morning.
Welcome to the select committee. You have five minutes.
Thank you very much.
It's in your hands.
Thank you, Rich, and thanks for the opportunity to speak.
I think I'll just read from my notes to make sure I do get through this in time.
I'm speaking more of our local fishing here because
that's what I have knowledge of. So,
kia ora koutou. My name is Bruce Boyd.
I've spent more than 50 years fishing the South
Taranaki coast and the last 25 years diving its reefs.
Over that time, I've watched
changes unfold that should concern every one of us who cares about the
health of our moana.
When I first started fishing, blue cod were everywhere. They were our staple.
And even with a bag limit of 30 fish, you could be out and back within
a few hours with your limit.
That abundance is now a memory. Bag limits have dropped from 30
to 20
to 10.
And today we've got an allowed limit of just two
legal blue cod per person, and even then, finding them
is becoming rare.
Our local fishing club has removed the blue cod category from
its annual competition because the fish simply aren't there.
For years, many of us believed the South Taranaki coast had a
natural buffer against overfishing.
The dangerous bar crossing, the lack of sheltered islands, and the rough
west coast conditions meant recreational fishers could
only get out a limited number of days each year.
But while we were stuck on shore, commercial vessels capable of working
in far heavier seas continued fishing the grounds year-round.
It's fair to ask whether this imbalance has contributed to the depletion we're
seeing now.
Adding to the challenge, the South Taranaki Bight has never been a priority
for major research organizations.
There has been very little study done on its marine
environment. That lack of data leaves a dangerous blind spot
in our understanding of what's beneath the surface.
To help fill that gap, the South Taranaki Underwater Club launched Project
Reef a decade ago, of which I'm co-lead.
Using citizen science, we've documented the subtidal rocky reefs of the
region
and sharing our findings with earth sciences, universities, and Te
Papa fish specialists. In 2020, our collaboration with Dr.
Mark Morrison led to a multabeam mapping of many of these reefs,
followed by a coast cam video survey focused on juvenile blue
cod habitat. What we found is both
encouraging and deeply concerning.
The reefs still support healthy populations of juvenile blue cod.
They're there, growing, sheltering, doing what young fish do.
What's happening to them once they leave the reef is not known.
What we do know is we're not finding the adult fish numbers we once did.
If this is just one small snapshot of what's happening around the motu,
then we should all be alarmed. The decline of a once abundant
species is not just a local issue, it's a warning sign.
We need to act with urgency and foresight.
We need management that prioritizes long-term
sustainability over short-term extraction.
We need legislation that genuinely protects the moana
for future generations.
Right now, I do not believe the bill in its current form
provides a level of stewardship required to safeguard
our marine environment. If we want our children and
grandchildren to enjoy the same coastal abundance we once took for granted,
we must demand stronger science-based, future-focused
protections. The ocean has given us so much, it's time
we give something back.
That's me. So basically, I'm saying there that it's not too late to
turn things around.
We still have
juvenile fish stocks there,
but we need to look after them, and we need to do it now.
Thank you, Bruce. Are there any questions?
Don't seem to be. Look, I appreciate a really
well-articulated submission, Bruce, and I think you made
your points very well.
Thank you.
So thank you very
muchRight.
We're just having trouble getting a hold of the next submitter.
So we'll suspend till 10:30 and come back at
10:30.And
we're going to jump around the agenda a little bit.
So Satish Cussens.
Just grab that seat there.
That just there?
Yep.
Yeah. Perfect.
All right.
Welcome, Satish.
Kia ora.
Yeah.
Far away. You got five minutes.
Sweet as. Kia ora. I appreciate this opportunity to come down, means a lot to
me.
So I'm a recreational diver/fisherman, and
I'm also hopefully a couple of months away from completing my master's thesis
within marine science, looking at sea urchins/kina
and how they respond to climate change down in Fiordland.
So my first
problem comes within Section 11, where we're moving away from
ecosystem-based management into a single stock management.
From my research, I can understand that ecosystem and the
ocean is intrinsically connected,
and we see that within overfishing in the Hoki
Gulf and when we overfish our snapper and crayfish, we have a
boom in our kina, which in turn eats all the kelp up
and
destroys the nurseries for those juvenile fish and crayfish.
For me, this kind of completely misses the ecological tipping point,
and as well as it's kind of obvious that we're just burning the candle from both
ends, essentially.
Destroying, overfishing and then destroying the nurseries where those
fish occupy.
And then also, the five-year lock
in of quota will mean that there's no
adaptive management
available.
With climate change setting in, marine heatwaves are going to
increase, which means a five degree increase in the
normal temperature. We saw this down in 2022 in Fiordland.
We had a heatwave that bleached 90% of our sponges,
and this bill would not allow us to manage these events as they
come. So a good example of this is down in America.
This technique was used when they had a marine heatwave in 2014
and they adapted their quota system
to stop overfishing of krill and other species, which in turn
saved their humpback whales, as there's a key migration
through there.
Just to conclude,
without scientists, without having proper data, we can't make proper
predictions and we will have worse outcomes
leading to, down the track, future generations not being able
to fish recreationally and use a
resource that's so
been gifted to us, essentially. Yeah.
Thanks, Satish.
Thank you.
We have some questions from Teanau.
Kia ora. Thank you very much for your
very strong submission.
I was interested in your comments around marine heatwaves and the
impacts in terms of what climate change is doing and what's coming down the
line. I was wondering, in your opinion,
what would
good fisheries legislation look like?
I mean, what are the
top one or two things you think we should be addressing instead of
what's currently in this bill?
I think a collaboration between scientists and commercial fishermen,
really.
Yeah, being able to manage fisheries as
they come and also into the future, if we have
collaboration because
commercial fishermen do know a lot about the ocean and so do our scientists.
So if they collaborate, we can have a stronger
bill, and that doesn't push scientists to the side.
So, yeah.
So
just a sub on that, I guess.
When you say collaboration,
who do you include in that collaboration?
The public, universities or science institutes and
commercial fishermen.
Yeah.
As well as politicians, I guess.
Okay. Thank you. Any further questions?
No. Look, thank you very much for your time.
Thanks for having me.
I really appreciate it. It's not easy to do, and you did well.
Sweet as. Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, we are going to move on now to Kirsten
Bridge, who's
kindly
moved her program forward to
fit in with the
select committee. SoWe'll just wait for her to come
online. Is she online or is she-
Yep, she's on
She's online.
Morning, Kirsten.
Thanks for being flexible
and
throwing your timeline out to fit in
with us.
I didn't know that it was going to be like that.
I was just trying to warm up by listening to somebody, and I only got one.
Oh, well.
I'm sure you-
So I'm definitely feeling braver than I meant to feel.
I'm sure you'll do fine.
You have five minutes.
Take your submission's been read.
So if you want some questions, leave some time at the end.
Away you go.
Okay.
This is my first oral submission to
any select committee, so I am a little bit nervous, and
I just want to immediately
just to share with the room, because you'll hear my accent.
I just want to come forward and say
I married a New Zealander. That's how you hear this accent.
I've lived here since 1999. I married into a family that
has a batch, a family batch on Kawau Island.
So from, since that time, I've been attending and been
a guardian of that batch, as well as living there and enjoying the sea from
Kawau Island. And I live in Murrays Bay on the North Shore of
Auckland. So I spend every single day by the sea.
And that
puts me as a person who cares about the ocean, and I do not support
the Fisheries Amendment Bill as it is.
I don't really want to come on here and really
speak too much because I've already written what I've said.
Yes.
My intention behind coming on here today was actually to give a human
quality to what I have written and say that I am very
concerned that as a woman who has
had her kids and raised them on the shore, I have grave concern
that when I'm at Kawau Island, we now don't see fish that are swimming under the
wharf, and that I have future grandchildren that might be born and think that the
fish
don't really live in the sea, that they may be only something that you buy.
And I want to say that my grandchildren will not think that
the ocean is a swimming pool. They won't get confused.
They don't think it's just one and the same.
So really, I'm here just adding that richness that Kawau can no longer
get scallops. There's a ban.
And this Fisheries Amendment Bill, it's
just focusing narrowly on the fishing, and it's taken away the consequences of
looking at how fishing is impacting the whole ecosystem.
So I won't make this a very long submission.
I just really want to come in and say, I am very concerned with how this
bill does not actually look at the impact on
the wider marine ecosystem
and the enjoyment and the treasure of the oceans that New Zealand has
everywhere.
Thank you,
Kirsten. We have a question from Todd Stevenson.
Hi, Kirsten. Thank you, and thank you for making your first submission.
Very well done, and I was just reading your submission.
Just want to, I suppose, a point of clarity, obviously, you talk about
we should not support the bill.
And then you talk about how we could potentially make commercial fishing more
sustainable. Have you got any thoughts around that?
Because I just want to make sure you're not saying we should get rid of commercial
fishing altogether, but you're raising this issue around sustainability
and the practices, I suppose.
Yeah.
My husband and I spoke about this this morning, and obviously fishing is an
industry that needs to be considered.
How do I see that working is I--
Well, I've actually would probably be more honestly focused on the Hauraki
Gulf because that's what I'm more close to.
And I've read some of the reviews that have been done by any party in the
past about how we can look at improving the Hauraki Gulf and making greater--
There's things we can do that create more protected areas that
allow the commercial fishers to still fish, and I still value the commercial
fishing as an industry, but just having some safeguards around it.
And I actually would be just the kind of layperson in the public.
I'm not necessarily the scientist like you've heard before me.
I'm just the person who really does care about it, and I'd be somebody who would be
interested in learning and how we could collaborate.
But I'm not that person that's on a scientific, and I'm not at a university.
I'm just more the person who cares and wants to see the abundance.
No, thank you. No, your perspective's valuable. Thank you.
Yeah.
Any further questions?
Thank you very much for your submission, Kirsten.
I think you made your point very well.
And
I know it can be a daunting prospect to
present to the select committee, but it's a very important process,
and we need people like you to engage for the select committee to
make the right decisions. So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Right. We're still having a few issues catching some of these
submitters who were
lined up to submit. So we're going to suspend until
10:50
and come back.
Thank
you.Are
the other members on?
Yep, Todd is.
I'm here.
Thanks, Rachel. Right. This next submitter is
Christopher Camp, and he's doing it via phone call.
Hello.
Christopher. You're here with the-
Yeah
... Primary Production Select Committee.
Right, thanks.
Look, thanks for taking the time to make a submission.
You have five minutes, and the time is yours.
Okay. Thanks for hearing me. The thing that
concerns me is the removal of inspections,
the
lack of catch limits,
size limits being
pretty much done away with.
It's not New Zealand fisheries that it's restricted to.
The product is not processed here, so there's no
value added to it.
Just to diverge slightly, when you have a government that
allows gold mining and strip mining
in a World Heritage site, it doesn't say much for their
ability to manage fisheries. If they
allow this amendment to go ahead, then in a
matter of about five years, you're going to have a fairly dead zone around New
Zealand. The way in which they fish is going to be strip mining,
but only in the water, and they'll be taking up all the
species. They'll be dumping a lot of dead fish, which will be
polluting,
and I have no confidence of the way--
the Fisheries Act, the way it is at the moment, works.
There's no reason to deplete the control of our
fisheries for the sake of
possibly very unscrupulous fisheries
people.
I've looked at
films of fishing done in other countries, and ours
actually is world-class the way it is at the moment.
It's actually been weakened a little bit with the removal of cameras off boats.
When they had the cameras on the boats, people were a lot more
circumspect in the way they conducted themselves.
I think that the way it is at the moment works pretty well,
and there's no reason to actually put in an amendment,
because if they're setting catch limits for five years
ahead,
and they're not keeping up with what's
taking place and not tracking the amount of fish that's
being taken, and they're removing sanctuaries,
which is where fish breed, it's going to be destroying the fishing
industry in New Zealand within about five years.
And the thing is that New Zealand's not benefiting a lot for it because
they're selling licenses. We're not selling the fish.
We're not getting the chance to process the fish.
I think it's a very backward step.
That pretty much wraps up what I have to say.
So I can't add much more to that other than I think the
select committee should use their power to do as they have done
before, and that is
restore our faith in governance.
Thanks very much, Christopher. Are there any questions from the
committee?
Right. So there don't seem to be
any questions. Christopher, thank you very much for your time
and for yourAs
submission.
Okay. Thank you. And thanks for hearing me.
No,
we appreciate it.
So we're going to move on next to Shane Rawiri,
who is also submitting by phone.
Yes, hello, Shane speaking.
Shane, welcome. You're on the
PA for the Primary Production Select Committee.
Hi.
And thanks for taking the time to make a
submission. You've got five minutes
to make a submission, and in that time-
... in that time, if you could leave some time for questions, would be really
useful. So fire away.
Okay.
What I believe in
this whole ordeal
of--
because basically,
the public is not allowed to fish. Am I correct?
Sorry, what was that?
This is because of the public-- stopping the
public from fishing. Am I correct?
No.
That's not the basis of the bill.
Okay. So what's the basis of the bill again?
It's changing some of the
restrictions around
commercial fishing in particular.
And
it's quite complex, I guess.
It'd take me more than five minutes to explain the
various nuances within the bill. But the idea of the select committee is to
hear
what the public have to say around
the proposals within that piece of legislation,
and it's our job to make sure that we
panel beat the bill out to make it
work, I guess. But the main
point of the
select committee is to hear what the public have to say.
Yeah. Yeah. That's fine. Hey, man.
Well, there's a lot to do with that
commercial fishing. Basically, I think that they're just going to wipe
out
our stocks of fish. Our
stocks at the moment are pretty low, and
with them having that control over where
there's no limits or size limits, which is going to decrease
the amount of fish that's going to be populating in the ocean,
not just only for
them, but also for us, as in the
public. Which I think is very unfair,
personally.
It gives us--
minimizes us from
catching
what we also deserve as in the public.
I
just think that it's wrong for them to be having that control,
basically.
Okay. So
could you tell us what you've seen in your lifetime
with the fisheries in your area?
The fisheries in my area.
Well,
I'm just going on off what
Matt Watson has
viewed, and how the government is taking
away the cameras which are on board all
commercial
trawlers. I think that's pretty wrong because they could be wiping out
endangered species, and we won't even know that.
And just taking
underserved
species, you know what I mean?
Yeah.
Which can therefore
basically
eliminate species of fish in some
sort of aspect, which I think is pretty wrong.
The fisheries around in my area, I
think-- Well, I live in Wellington, you see, and I just
fish off the rocks. I just grab
what's good for me and my family.
I don't abuse the
waters or anything. Everyone's got to have that sort of respect for
what's been taken.
Yep.
And if that's going to be abused
commercially,
they're taking more than what we actually
do as in public. So I think they have
every-Every
aspect of wiping out a colony or species of fish,
basically, I reckon.
Okay.
Thanks for that, Shane. Are there any further questions from the committee?
How do we actually stop all this from happening?
Well, this is part of the process,
Shane. It's for select committee to hear public's
views and then make a recommendation to Parliament.
So,
thank you very much for your time. We appreciate it.
And
have a good day.
Amen. I hope this all works well out for all of us, eh?
Be much appreciated.
Very good. Thank you.
Now our next submitter is Peter Hutch.
Or Peter Hutchinson, sorry.
Hi. Kia ora, and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Peter Hutchinson,
and I'm a lifelong recreational fisher,
diver,
and someone who has worked within the fishery sector.
I grew up fishing from the moment I could hold a line.
In the 1970s and '80s, I regularly fished from my
grandparents' backyard in central Auckland's Wakatakataka Bay,
where we caught piper, mullet, flounder, and kingfish,
feeding family and pets.
I have a photo taken in the early 1950s at my grandparents' property
in Hauraki of over 400 flounder and half a dozen kingfish,
which were distributed throughout the district.
Kohawha fish formed a staple part of community and was generally taken for
granted.
I gained my diving certificate at 12 and spent my school holidays fishing and
diving around Great Barrier Island.
Later, I studied aquaculture in Tasmania
and worked for MAF,
where I read firsthand reports on fisheries decline, particularly around the
introduction of the quota management system,
when many stocks were reduced to a fraction of their historic abundance in a few
short years.
I also worked on commercial fishing vessels and witnessed
fish being dumped
when the wharf price dropped below the cost of leased quota.
That experience showed me how economic incentives can override sustainability.
As a free diver for decades,
primarily in and around the beautiful Bay of Islands, I've seen what abundance
truly looks like.
Schools of kahawai, maomao, and kingfish stretching for miles,
and crayfish packed in a cave so tightly they spilled out into the open.
I have not seen anything like that for over 25 years.
Today, I dive simply to observe.
I choose not to take what I see in the hope that stocks might recover enough
for future generations to experience what I once did.
My children have no concept of that former abundance.
When I take them diving, what they see now they assume
is normal.
That is what we are at risk of locking in.
This bill does not rebuild abundance.
It weakens environmental safeguards, reduces transparency, and
prioritizes commercial flexibility and export value over
long-term sustainability and public access.
And it's that public access which I believe is absolutely
essential.
In my view, it continues a pattern that has already led to severe
depletion in many fisheries.
Fisheries are a shared public resource.
They should be managed to restore abundance for communities,
not to maximize short-term private gain.
I ask the committee to reject this bill and to instead pursue policies that
rebuild our fisheries so that future generations can experience the
richness that once defined our coastal waters.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your time. Any questions
from the committee?
Look, it was a very good submission,
and I think
perhaps a little bit of insight from you would be useful as
far as what you think is
required to return
to the abundance that you once saw.
Well, in reality, the
quota limits on coastal fisheries are just too high,
and they always have been.
If I refer back to
the papers which I saw which weren't
available to the public,
they may be available under the Official Information Act now, but
they demonstrated
that the fisheries declined to less than
10% of what they were in the 1950s in a few short years after the
introduction of quota in the
late 1980s.
And that damage was particularly stark in certain areas, particularly the top of
the South Island,
where snapper fisheries in particular became functionally extinct.
The Hauraki Gulf,
quite apparently,
has been decimatedAnd there are good
reasons. I agree with the restrictions put on,
particularly in the north, in terms of restrictions on fishing
for crayfish.
The
levels of destruction I've seen to that fishery has been
horrific, to put no finer point on it.
I believe that the fishery, and again, particularly the
coastal fishery, belongs to the community and not to
the commercial fishing sector.
These
fish are here for our people, not for a private select
few.
Okay, thank you very much. We've gone over time.
I really appreciate
the effort you've made in presenting your
submission.
Thank you very much.
Right, we're going to move on now to Dylan Shaw.
Dylan online, is he?
Yes.
Are you there, Dylan?
Hello?
Ah, Dylan.
Oh.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
I was a panelist and-
Yes
... my computer was having a hard time with that.
I know. Look,
welcome along. You have five minutes.
The time is yours. Away you go.
Terrific. I'll try and be brief.
Kia ora, my name is Dylan Shaw. I'm a recreational fisherman, diver,
and a keen observer of New Zealand's natural environment.
I'm from Dunedin originally, so yeah, grew up in that area,
doing a lot of spearfishing and fishing with my family and things like that.
I oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
I oppose it because it prioritizes the short-term interest of commercial fishing
operators over the long-term health, transparency, and public ownership of New
Zealand's fisheries.
We only need to look back a short way in New Zealand's history to see the
devastating impact of overfishing, due to ignorance and greed.
During the 1980s and 1990s, orange roughy were targeted by fishing
fleets with no regard for the potential impact on their numbers or the
greater marine ecosystem, all for a short-term financial gain.
The result was multiple collapsed stocks, many of which were depleted still to this
day. It's hard to not see the similarities between what happened to them and what
this bill may lead to.
Many New Zealand marine scientists have publicly raised concerns about fisheries
management, particularly the overfishing, ecosystem degradation, and
scientific uncertainty. The vast majority of finfish caught in our waters
are exported to countries such as China, who have depleted the stocks in their own
waters to the point that they have no choice but to import.
These countries don't care about the health of our waters or our personal
wellbeing, only what makes it to their plates.
This bill's stated purpose is to increase the number of fish sent offshore,
taking food off the plates of New Zealanders.
The removal of public access to onboard footage that this bill proposes seriously
erodes the right of New Zealanders to know what's being done to their nation's
resource, completely removing transparency and the assurance of independent
scrutiny. This action and the size of the penalties proposed under the bill for
those who illegally share this information indicates that there is
very likely things that they're wanting to keep hidden.
Sunlight has always been the best disinfectant, and this bill is attempting to
block out the sun.
It can't be expected that the former chairman of Sealord, a major quota owner,
would be able to make an unbiased decision when considering a bill that stands to
greatly advantage this industry.
Their only affiliation to any group of people that any politician should have is
one to the New Zealand public.
The party name's New Zealand First.
They should honor this and put the people of New Zealand first.
I was lucky enough to have been born into our beautiful country, and I've spent my
entire life in and on the ocean, enjoying what it has to offer, feeding
myself and my family.
All I wish is for my children, their children, and the children of all New
Zealanders to have the same opportunity.
For many New Zealanders, myself included, being able to fish recreationally to
sustain ourselves is essential for our overall wellbeing and is a vital part of
our culture.
I've asked countless numbers of my peers from all different backgrounds, and the
answer is unanimous. Every single one of them strongly opposes this
bill. Please kill this bill before it kills our oceans.
Thank you for your time.
Thanks very much. Now we'll go to some questions.
Are there any questions from the committee?
No, there doesn't seem to be. Look, Dylan, thank you very much for your
submission. It was very clear
and-
No problem. Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to voice my concerns.
No, and we appreciate you taking the time. Thank you very much.
Perfect. All right, enjoy the rest of your day.
Cheers.
Thank you.
Now we're moving on to Sam
Dowd.
Good morning.
Oh. Sam Dowd's here in person.
In person.
So,
I was looking on the screen for
someone to pop up. Welcome, Sam, to the committee.
You have five minutes. How you use that time's up to you.
Fantastic.
So, it's in your hands.
Cool, thank you.
First off, Mr. Chairman and honorable members attending today,
good morning.
My name is Sam Dowd. I am speaking here in a personal capacity, and the
views I share today are my own.
I strongly oppose the Fisheries Amendment Bill in its current form.
Committee members,
this bill is not just about fish
It's about how much visibility and control New Zealand is
willing to give up over one of its most critical public
resources. I speak as a recreational fisher, but I
also bring experience from fisheries patrols as a former sailor in our
navy,
and my current work as a principal advisor in a security
intelligence community. That gives me both first-hand experience
and a lens, strategic lens.
Fishing is a Kiwi way of life.
At four years old, my grandfather taught me to fish.
Today, I'm teaching my daughter, who is here with me today,
not only to fish-
Sorry, mate. Just a minute. Sorry, ma'am, you can't take photos in here without
permission of the committee.
Carry on
... to not only fish, but embracing Kaitiakitanga,
guardianship of our environment.
Today, I'll focus on three risks. My first concern is reduced compliance
awareness.
In 2004, I was involved in a paua poaching interdiction operation in the
Chatham Islands.
The divers were illegally harvesting and storing live paua on the ocean floor
for covert black market sale.
They were found with 250 kilo of live paua, which was returned to the ocean.
However, they lost their vessel, their vehicles, and their assets.
That is what real deterrence looks like.
But enforcement alone doesn't remove risk,
because systems can still be exploited.
In 2017, around 22 tons of Chatham Islands
shellfish was moved through a commercial fishing entity without being properly
reported.
That case demonstrates one simple reality, gaps already
exist.
Where a system relies heavily on reporting and trust, less
oversight and weaker deterrence create more opportunity to exploit those
gaps, both at scale and out of sight.
My second concern is the fisheries as a strategic resource.
Fisheries are not just an environmental matter, they are a strategic resource.
Food security, resilience, and community well-being.
Global pressures have put New Zealand's resilience on foreign resources
strongly into the spotlight.
My concern with this bill is that it shifts towards a greater discretion
and, through settings that affect transparency, penalties, and scrutiny,
reduces visibility of what is happening within the system.
It may improve flexibility, but flexibility without
visibility increases risk.
If data is delayed, incomplete, or less scrutinized, decisions are
made with later and with less certainty.
This is how stock decline happens quietly,
until recovery becomes slow, expensive, and uncertain.
Last year, I caught a legal sized kingfish out there, Wellington Harbor.
That fish provided 17 meals, and the rest was gifted off to the
community. That is what abundance looks like in practice,
local food security and resilience.
My third concern is the security of our exclusive economic
zone. We're operating in an increasingly contested global
environment where the maritime domain is of growing strategic importance.
Fisheries enforcement is not solely about conservation, it's about
visibility.
It contributes to the situational awareness, border integrity, and information
gathering of our EEZ,
particularly against illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.
New Zealand's own National Security Strategy 2023 identifies
maritime security, resource protection,
and economic resilience as its core priorities.
Recent investments in enhanced maritime surveillance aircraft and
vessels demonstrate a clear strategic direction,
increased domain awareness and presence.
Legislation that reduces oversight or transparency
risks working against that direction over time.
Let me finish by saying that maintaining strong, transparent, and enforceable
fisheries management is essential, not only for sustainability but
for national resilience and security.
At its core, this is a question of balance between efficiency
and oversight
and short-term gain over long-term sustainability.
If we get this wrong, we won't notice it immediately, but we
will feel it for generations.
Here to Kaitiakitanga.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much, Sam. Teanaru has a question.
Thank you very much for your comprehensive submission.
And I think this is the first time I've heard the
issues around security,
and the way that you've talked about it.
And I was interested around your comments around situational awareness,
in the
marine sphere.
So I was wondering,
how do you think it is right
now, and how do you think that it actually should be,
given the geopolitical tensions that we're
experiencing
around the world and how that is impacting us in the Pacific region?
Okay.
So
I believe that our current state puts us at a risk.
We have a decline in maritime fleet since the
'80s, and therefore we have less presence.
We also have stronger
threats than we currently used to have.
And so I think that having that
presence-Really enhances not only
the fisheries part, but it also really builds on
us as a brand being a deterrence for illegal activity, whether it be
fisheries or other within our exclusive economic zone.
Thanks very much, Sam. We're well over time now, but I really appreciate, and
the committee appreciates,
you taking the effort to come in and give us a fairly comprehensive
submission on probably something that others haven't
really focused on. So it's very good. Thank you.
Got it. Thank you.
Right. We're going to move on now to Craig Auton, I
think is how it might be pronounced. I have to ask him that.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Good morning, Craig.
Thanks.
Now,
Miles Anderson here. I'm the chair of the select committee.
You have five minutes. Look, just one thing.
How do you pronounce your last name?
It is Auton.
Auton. I was right.
Auton. Yes.
Thank you very much. Look, you have five minutes.
How you use that time is up to you. So fire away.
Okay. I'd just like to start, I think, with the main issue,
even before this bill, is that we have a very outdated and broken
quota management system.
Back in 1986, this system was designed for
commercial fishing for sustainability
for our fisheries.
Back then when it was first formed, there were over 1,200 individual quota
owners.
We come to the present,
73% of the fisheries quota now is
owned by 10 individual identities.
We have what they call paper fish now.
We have people in offices that own quota and lease it out to make the money.
Now, the QMS was never intended to be used this
way.
Mm.
And it was set up so obviously it could be exploited,
so we've started from the word go of exploitation.
We have a
commercial industry that's mantra is all about sustainability.
It's on TV. It's on all their ads.
Yet we have them not wanting their camera footage be publicized
and no cameras on the boats. Now, those cameras are there for a reason,
and one of them is for sustainability, and that
is to make sure that the reporting of bycatch
and what have you is actually correct.
As data has shown since these
cameras have been installed, there are two species now that
are up over 1,000% on bycatch
reporting.
That in itself is alarming.
I don't need to carry on about anything else.
They talk about sustainability, yet they don't want to use the
tools that are there to make sure it is sustainable.
So
to give more power to an already deceitful industry, to be
honest,
I think it's up to you politicians to prove to us people of New Zealand that
common sense is still there,
and that you guys are going to listen to the people and
veto this bill.
That's all I've got to say. Thank you.
Thanks very much, Craig. We'll go to the committee for some questions.
Todd Stevenson.
Well, thanks, Craig, and thanks for your submission and your views.
Obviously, you think we need to do something different from the
current quota management system.
Have you got some ideas about what we should be doing?
Well, it's very hard to--
Of course, I'm not full-time in that, but I think the
science in behind of how many fish are in the sea is a bit broken,
to be honest.
At best, it's a guess.
They say they're estimates, blah, blah, blah.
Well, they're not sheep in a paddock where you can see them and count them.
So basically, we don't know, do we?
And with the estimates anyway, what's the variance?
Like on polls, they have a variance of plus 3,
minus or plus. What's the variance on the science of our stocks?
So very hard. I think you've just got to err on the side of caution.
Up the west coast here in the North Island, snapper's a brilliant one.
We had s**t fishing for 30-odd years.
The quota was kept at the same, even reduced 1%.
We've had the best fishing we've had for five years.
Now all of a sudden, a 40% increase.
So what, we're going to go around full circle, have a depleted fishery again,
and spend another 30 years rebuilding it?
I don't know. The QMS just needs to be overhauled and looked at,
and to make it fairer for all. Because in the last 10 years,
everything that has been added to it is all just for commercial interest.
And yeah, honestly, the people of New Zealand I think are getting a bit fed up with
it.
Thanks.
Awesome. Cheers.
Any further questions?
No.
All right. Thank you very much, Craig.
Awesome. Thank you for your time, and thank you for letting me speak.
No, thank you.
Great.
Thank you.
Cheers.
Really appreciate it. We'll move on now.
Thank you. Take care.
We have Bronson Ata,
who's our next submitter, via
ZoomJust
having a few technical difficulties here, team.
Yeah.
If anyone's listening who's a possible submitter,
if you get a notification to be
elevated to a panelist, please accept that
elevation, because that then allows you to make your submission.
We're going to move on then-
To Ryan Welsh
... to Ryan Welsh. All right.
Kia ora.
Welcome, Ryan.
Yeah, welcome.
Thanks for making the time
to give an oral submission.
You have
five minutes,
so fire away.
Yep. Kia ora koutou. Just a little bit of background on
myself, I suppose.
I actually used to work in fisheries in what was called, once upon a
time, the Fisheries Research Division, which then
changed to MAF Fish, and then of course morphed into NIWA
as it currently stands.
My background in fisheries was actually in fisheries management.
So just to lay a little bit of the foundation around
understanding in terms of the quota management system
and the ecosystem as a whole.
I actually
am not a commercial fisherman at
all, but
have been an avid recreational fisherman on the back of
that previously, that
vocation.
So just to speak to the submissions that I've made,
I do strongly oppose the changes.
Some of the
main reasons for that are the
ecosystem itself in terms of
the fisheries, the way in which the fisheries management system works, in which
it's very one-dimensional, doesn't take into account the
ecosystem as a whole.
Of which
it very much is very
by its nature linked together. So if we
impact on one part of the fishing ecosystem, then it
actually impacts on the rest.
The way in which we currently
catch fish, which is through the bottom trawling system, is a very blunt
instrument to capture what is normally a targeted species
with a whole lot of other species that get caught up in the mix.
So from that perspective, in terms of the
way in which fish are caught,
I
don't agree with it whatsoever. There's much better practices
which can be employed
to get a greater return on those fish as well, and we also don't
impact on other species which get caught up
in bottom trawling.
The other thing too, I think, which is some of the arguments
that have been put forward too, which is around the
fishing industry
having a greater say in terms of the management of the fishery.
Well,
look, that's pretty much putting the fox in charge of the henhouse.
You could argue from the fishery side of things that,
yes, look, we'd be wanting to make sure it's sustainable
because of the actual long, the inputs that we have from an
economic perspective
regards to the resources that we've put into large fishing boats,
people, all those sorts of things.
The problem with that is that as
human beings, I suppose if we lived for 200 years we might have a different
perspective on that, but we don't.
We tend to have a quick turnaround in terms of return on our own
investment. So
my thoughts are that
it's better left to the people and to those
successive
people that inherit the actual resource, which is
the youth of today and those yet to be born.
The fact that there was a
suggestion that
cameras are removed from commercial boats, to me,
again is
in terms of the robustness of anything, it is about transparency
and accountability, of course. Those things go together.
More transparency there is, more accountability there is.
So to even think that that was a good idea, I don't
even know how you join those dots to think that's a good idea, to be honest.
The other aspect to it, the socioeconomic
impacts on it and income and employment.
One of the biggest things, I live in Northland.
Now, one of the
biggest-One of the biggest recreational
pastimes of a lot of Northlanders is fishing.
Now, that economic impact on the local
economy in terms of fuel, boats,
fishing equipment, you name it,
reaches far beyond
a
fishing industry where there's a few trawlers
scraping the bottom of the ocean, of which there would be maybe,
I don't know, let's just say there was 100 people employed in total across those
boats and the processing.
I'm not sure of the exact figures, but what I do know
is that within the recreational fishing industry, there is a far greater
economic impact on the local economy
than what is
received from
commercial fishers.
The
other aspect to this, I suppose,
that I wanted to highlight was around
the type of, I suppose,
fisheries. I just heard the previous submitter talking
before about the science of fisheries, and he's right, it's not an exact science.
It's always about it's an estimate.
And I can tell you from previous experience
way down the line when we used to do
surveys of orange roughy,
hoki fisheries, and lots of other fisheries on various research
boats and also commercial boats, a lot of the information that
was gleaned and gained, which then went towards setting the quota,
was done with using rigorous scientific
method.
But then what would happen is it would get politicized, and often those
minister-- at the time I wasn't that old, but I certainly could
see the frustration from the fishery scientists
around what happened when the quota
was finally assessed and given to the minister to
actually use to set the quota, where it was then
kicked around as a political football by the fishing industry
backwards and forwards. Now-
Thank you, Ryan. We're well over time.
Yep.
I really appreciate
your perspective from someone who's had
a different experience within the industry.
So thank you very much.
Not a problem.
Right. I think we have Craig Rikihana
next.
Welcome, Craig-
Hello
... to the Primary Production Select Committee.
You have five minutes. How you use that time is up to you.
Fire away.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you for the opportunity to address this committee today.
I'm Craig. I'm a proud New Zealander who wants to be able to take my nephews,
my nieces, and their children fishing in the same
waters that I fish in.
I have already submitted my written opposition to this bill.
Today, I want to make three short points, then ask you one honest question.
Point one, this bill legalizes the harvesting of baby fish.
Minimum size limits are not
bureaucracy, they are biology.
A snapper or any fish must reach a certain size before it can breed, even
once. Take a fish before that size and you remove its entire
future of spawning.
This bill, as drafted, removes that protection
for commercial fishers.
Excuse me.
Recreational fishers like myself still have to follow size limits.
The science is clear, fish need to breed.
But this bill carves out a special exemption for the commercial
industry.
The same biology applies to everyone.
You cannot have two different laws of nature.
The minister has since backed down on some species after public outcry,
but the framework remains. The precedent is set.
If you legalize the killing of juvenile fish, you are harvesting
the nursery or the kōhanga.
As one critic says,
"The size limit clause was just the clickbait.
The rest of the bill remains and the precedent is set.
Once the kōhanga is empty, there's no coming back."
Point two, the fine on camera footage hides the truth from
New Zealanders.
Onboard cameras were introduced for transparency.
They were meant to show what actually happens on commercial fishing vessels, the
bycatch, the dumping, the waste. This bill imposes a
$50,000 fine on anyone who releases that footage
to the public.
If the industry is doing nothing wrong, why hide the evidence?
Sealing those cameras protect lawbreakers, not fish stocks.
It locks the public out of a conversation we have every right to be part of.
This is not accountability. This is a secrecy clause, plain and
simple.
Point three, the 20-day appeal window makes legal challenges
impossible. The bill restricts legal challenges to fisheries
decisions to just 20 working days.
Christ. Official Information Act requests often take longer than 20
days just to receive a response.
How can any citizen, any environmental group, any Maori
collective gather evidence, understand a decision, and
mount a legal challenge in that timeframe?
This provision does not improve the law.
It removes the public's right to hold the government
accountable.Finally, a question,
and this is the heart of my submission.
What I cannot understand is this, why are such
significant changes to our fishery laws being introduced as amendments
rather than standalone legislation?
These are not minor technical fixes.
They remove size limits, they reduce fines, they restrict legal
challenges, they criminalize transparency.
If these changes are good for New Zealand, if they truly protect
sustainability while modernizing the industry,
why are they being bundled together and rushed
through without proper separate scrutiny?
Now, I'm not saying this is bad governing, but good governing does not rush changes
this significant.
Here is the fact, the commercial fishing industry has a long history of
bycatch, illegal dumping, and stock collapse.
The minister himself has acknowledged that trust in fisheries management
is broken, and yet this bill reduces accountability,
hides evidence, weakens penalties.
When you reduce accountability in a low trust industry, you do not fix the
problem, you enable it.
Now, a good government does not hide evidence behind a $50,000
fine, and a good government does not make it harder for its own people to hold
it to account.
And in closing, I'm not asking you to kill this bill because I'm angry, I'm
asking you to kill this bill because I care.
I care about the industry, I care about the fishers who do the right thing
every day,
and I care about my nephews, all our moko, who deserve to fish
in the same waters we did as we grew up.
So please, do not pass this bill. Do not let short-term
profit destroy a resource that belongs to us all.
Consult properly, get this right. Kia ora.
Thank you very much, Craig. We've got enough time for one quick question.
Teanau.
Uh, chairman. Craig, thank you very much for a very strong submission and
for having that future-focused vision within your submission
as well. And I completely agree with what you're saying.
I was wondering, if there
was going to be, in the future, a Fisheries Amendment Bill, what
would be the top thing or the top two things you think should be in
it?
Sorry, you keep breaking up quite badly.
But I understand you say what do I think should be in
a future fisheries bill?
Yeah. In a bill which you could support.
Yeah, look,
how it is today,
look, nothing's perfect, but the evidence is clear that
when we have good, strong management, good legislation,
it works.
Now,
the minister mentioned something about being able to walk across
the water because of the amount of stock that's here.
There's only one reason why that happened, is because of the management and the
legislation that protected those fisheries.
So that's all I say.
If it works, what we should be doing is massaging
current legislation and current management processes to improve
everything across the board. This legislation, these amendments
don't do that. I'm not sure how people can actually
come to
a decision that, or come to
an idea, that any of these things actually help
enhance what's already in place. So, in regards to what
do I think, I think we should
accept history, look at the management processes that worked,
and enhance those.
Thanks very much, Craig. We've come well over
time, but I really appreciate your submission.
It was very comprehensive.
So we'll move on. Thank you very much.
So who have we got now, Ben?
Ben Chisel.
Ben is on the r- yes, excellent.
All right, yep.
So we've got Ben Chisel next.
And we'll try and fit some in after.
Okay.
Gidday.
Uh, gidday, Ben. Um, wel-
So do I just turn the camera on, or did I just turn it off?
Uh, you've turned it off I think. Is that right, guys? Yep.
Is that working now?
No.
No. Oh, well. Just have to go radio style.
Oh, it's the best. Uh-
Hold on. Here it goes, a little cross here.
There we go.
Excellent.
Um-
All right
... thanks for your time, Ben.
Welcome to the committee. You have five minutes to
make your submission.
Yep, no problem.
Uh, fire away.
I obviously sent through my submission-
Yes
... what I've, what I thought was about two weeks ago.
Quite a tricky process. Turns out I hadn't sent it through, so I was lucky I
double-checked.
Managed to get it through a couple of nights ago.
So,
given sort of the vocality I've had against this bill, I probably should've
been one of the first.
But nonetheless, it's out there anyway.
So,
thanks for giving me the opportunity to speak here.
First of all, so my name's Ben Chisel.
I'm the founder of the New Zealand Fishing Community,
115,000 members,
and also one of the founders of the One Ocean Protest,
which was in November last year,
obviously raising concerns about the early version of this
billBefore it even got to where it is now.
So I haven't prepared anything specific or a
speech that I want to read off.
But I guess I wanted to say there's a lot of organizations out there at the moment.
In particular, there's Legacy.
Now, Legacy obviously are self-funded,
and they are the voice for what's commonly known as the recreational
fisherperson, which I strongly dislike.
I much rather to call us public fisheries,
because not everyone out there does it for recreation.
So Legacy have been battling away for a long time
against various different ministers.
Obviously the one at the moment is probably the most challenging in recent
memory.
Legacy have to go through a very political route, because they
deal with a lot of politicians and they're on TV and so forth.
This can only get them so far. Now, with the
bill last year,
the public sentiment got beyond,
I guess, what Legacy could do.
And everyone became so angry that we
basically had to arrange a protest, otherwise the people were going to do it
themselves and it might have ended up with
a few more frozen pilchards through people's windows.
So
the One Ocean protest, we are basically a megaphone for
the public fishermen and fisherwomen.
We amplify their sentiment. So the public were
calling for a protest.
It's just been decades and decades of being pushed
aside, not given a proper voice, and it just got to a
point where people had had enough.
So everyone snapped at the same time and
the protest was arranged late last year in the middle
of a month.
Now the four of us that had arranged that protest,
none of us are
extremists, so to speak. None of us had even been to a protest
before. So we're not the
Yamaha Kawasaki Hikae experts that we were
claimed to be. We were quite the novices at that.
But the turnout we had for that was, according to one news presenter, he
believes the most expensive in terms of assets that were at
the protest.
And the good thing with that was it was everyone from all walks of life.
Much like rugby in New Zealand. You've got the wealthy teams from Ponsonby,
you've got teams from Gore, you've got teams from Otara.
Everybody from every walk of life in New Zealand has some understanding of
rugby and it's very much the same
with
fisheries. It's not like horse racing where it's refined to
Karaka and Cambridge.
This touches everybody. So it got to a point
beyond frustration where we said, "Look, we've been on the political route for 20
years. It's enough. Now the public are going to say something
and they're going to be really loud about it." So that's why it
was
established and I already had a base of over 100-something thousand at the
time. That was pretty easy to get that message out to.
Thanks, Ben. Look, we've got a question from Rachael Boyack.
And if we have time, Tiana.
Fire away.
Thanks, Chair. Hi, Ben. Nice to see you.
You too.
Can you just quickly just let us know some of the specific concerns
you've got about the bill? Like if there were the top two or three issues you've
got, just let us know what those would be.
Yeah. Okay. So I did actually quickly write those down before I came
in.
I guess the overarching thing is that this
industry, more than any other industry in New Zealand, for as long as it's been
around, has had more shade around it by a
significant amount.
My mother-in-law was one of three people who was given three days in
1986 to write the QMS.
She will quite happily tell you it was great then,
but it needs to be replaced now. Now she sends in her own submission
too. I'm not aware of what's in that, that's up to her.
But if you look at the people that were actually involved in the QMS back in the
day,
it was the Wild West. They had no time to do anything.
They were given three days and a hotel in Wanaka in their
mid-30s to write the QMS, and that's how it came about.
And now you've got
Minister Jones
claiming that he's going to make it better
is
quite questionable seeing where those donations come from.
So I guess in terms of me, some suggestions
for how it could be better. One, throw it out, start again.
And when you're going to do that, I think you need more freedom
for the independent fishermen. I've met with Seafood New Zealand, I've talked with
a lot of smaller commercial fishermen, and they are so
scared to say anything that they disagree with because they'll get their
quota or their ace taken off them.
Give them some freedom to make a little bit more
money. But the QMS and the quota holders are
holding them to ransom.
They deem where they can fish. They deem what they will pay them.
They've got no option out there.
The issue with the undersized fish,
it's a tricky one, I will admit.
If trawling is going to continue, we would rather those
fish be kept. Okay? Now that's how this was being
pitched to the public by the minister, but that is not the
case. With trawling, anything you bring on board dies. Okay?
So if the small snapper are going to be there, might as well keep them.
But this bill doesn't-allow for that.
It allows for the fishermen to dump those fish if they want to, or
keep them if they want to. And if they do dump them,
the minister can give allowance to
make up for loss of income or whatever the terminology was around
that. So there is actually no incentivization for
trawlers
to stop doing what they're doing, because they can keep it if they want, they can
throw it if they want, and if they throw it, they'll get given more quota anyway.
It doesn't do anything.
So
there's no reason why the public should
trust the fishing sector,
particularly the big quota holders.
So to remove OIA
requests to find people,
to
get rid of all these extra rules and say, "Trust us," show
us why, because there's no reason.
Okay, thank you, Ben. We've gone well over time, but I really
appreciate your perspective.
And thank you very much for your time.
No problem.
Now, did we get a hold of
Bronson? Right, our next submitter is
Bronson Ata.
Hello, can you hear me?
Morning, Bronson. How are you?
Yeah, good thanks. Good. Apologies for the technical difficulty.
That's all right. It happens to us all.
Yeah.
So thanks for making yourself available.
You have five minutes. Fire away.
Right. Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Bronson Ata, and I've spent much of my life in and
around the ocean.
I've worked on fishing boats in and around the marine industry for more than
15 years.
And I've spent countless hours diving and fishing around New Zealand.
While diving for scallops, I've personally watched dredgers sweep across the sea
floor and destroy the environment beneath them.
I've seen areas that once held life and abundance become increasingly barren
over time.
My family went to the same crayfish nest for decades.
My dad taught me to always leave the biggest crayfish in the nest because he
believed it helped keep the nest healthy.
That knowledge wasn't written in regulations.
It was stewardship passed down through generations.
Eventually, a commercial cray pot was placed on that nest,
and the big crayfish was taken.
Many years later, that nest still hasn't properly recovered.
That experience has stayed with me because it showed me how easy it is to lose
something that can take decades to rebuild.
I've also seen people exploiting the current system by making multiple trips per
day and taking far more than what most New Zealanders would consider reasonable
or sustainable.
From my perspective, those experiences show that aspects of the current system
are not working as well as they should.
I understand there are competing interests, and I don't pretend
that the answers are simple.
Commercial fishing is important for jobs, exports, food supply, and
regional communities. This should not become
recreational fishers versus commercial fishers.
But recreational fishers deserve to be recognized as part of the solution.
Some of the most knowledgeable and conservation-minded people I know are
recreational fishers. They spend thousands of hours on the water.
They notice changes early. They pass knowledge down through
generations, and many genuinely care about leaving the
fishery better than they found it.
That stewardship matters.
I grew up believing the ocean was something special, a place where families could
gather food together and experience the kind of connection to nature that makes New
Zealand unique.
Because people protect what they feel connected to.
Healthy fisheries also support a huge wider marine economy, from boat
builders and marine servicing through to tourism, hospitality,
fuel sales, accommodation providers and skilled marine trades.
New Zealand should be building world leading fisheries based on abundance,
quality, tourism, marine innovation and long-term value,
not simply extraction volume alone.
But what I've seen over time is gradual depletion, less abundance,
smaller expectations and behavior that the current rules don't
discourage strongly enough.
I think many ordinary New Zealanders feel like they're watching gradual
decline become normalized.
And I don't think we should accept that as inevitable.
New Zealand should be aiming for abundance again, where marine life is thriving,
ecosystems are healthy, and future generations can experience some of the same
richness many older New Zealanders took for granted.
That means protecting sensitive habitats better, recognizing the
long-term value of a healthy inshore fisheries, and strengthening,
not reducing, meaningful consultation and inclusion of
recreational fishers in stewardship and decision making.
Because moving decision making further away from the people most connected to these
fisheries risks losing generations of practical knowledge, stewardship
and experience.
I've spoken to many highly experienced people across the marine industry and
recreational sector, and I struggle to find anyone who genuinely
believes this bill moves us towards more abundant and resilient
fisheries.
I believe New Zealand has an opportunity to lead the world in modern fisheries
management, balancing sustainability, commercial success,
recreation, tourism, marine innovation and long-term abundance
together.
But respectfully, I do not believe this bill in its current form moves us towards
that future. Because
ultimately, these fisheries are not just an economic resource, they are part of
our national identity, our lifestyle, and something we
hold in trust for future generations.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Bronson, for a
well-thought-out submission and well articulated.
Do we have any questions?
Right. We've come to time anyway. So,
as I said, thank you very much. We really appreciate it.
Great. Thank you.
We'll hear next team. ...
of
the submissions. There's a number
who had indicated they were
going to make a submission today who just haven't been able
to get in touch or whatever.
So the committee will--
Well, we're not going to suspend. We're going to
wind up, and then the committee B will
carry on at 1:00 p.m.
with the next lot of hearings. And then, of course, we're all
entitled to go on that committee as well, if we have
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Very good. Thank-